Add data disk documentation (#19654)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_includes/common-tasks/data_disk.md

![Graphics showing the architecture of the data disk feature](/images/haos/usb-data-disk.png)

The data disk feature can be used on an existing installation without loosing data: The system will move existing data to the external data disk automatically. However, it is recommended to create and download a full <a href="#backups">Backup</a> before proceeding!

<div class='note warning'>

  All data on the target disk will be overwritten!

</div>

<div class='note'>

  The storage capacity of the external data disk must be larger than the storage capacity of the existing (boot) disk.

</div>

<div class='note'>

  If you have been using a data disk previously with Home Assistant Operating System, you need to use your host computer to delete all partitions *before* using it as data disk again.

</div>

### Using UI to move the data partition

1. Connect the data disk to your system.

> 2. Go to {% my supervisor_system title="Supervisor > System" %} in the UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Go to **{% my supervisor_system title="Supervisor >> System" %}** in the UI.
```

> 2. Go to **{% my supervisor_system title="Supervisor >> System" %}** in the UI.

Author: ```suggestion
2. Go to **{% my supervisor_info title="Supervisor >> System" %}** in the UI.
```

Author: Just realized that supervisor_system 404s...

Reviewer: Right... we should probably fix that...
ref: https://github.com/home-assistant/my.home-assistant.io/issues/97

3. Press the three dots on the bottom right of the Host card and choose "Move datadisk"
4. Select the data disk from the list of available devices.
5. Press "Move".

> ![Screenshot of the "Move datadisk" feature](/images/screenshots/move-datadisk.png)

Reviewer: Generally, we use the default light theme in screenshots from the Home Assistant UI, can you replace this?

Author: Well it is "default": my browser selects the dark theme automatically somehow, even on a newly installed system. But yeah, agreed, consistency. :+1:

### Using CLI to move the data partition

To see the current data disk use:

```sh
$ ha os info
...
data_disk: /dev/mmcblk1p4
...
```

To getting a list of supported detected devices which can be used by `datadisk`:

```sh
ha os datadisk list
```

To initiate the move to the new data disk use the `move` command:

```sh
ha os datadisk move /dev/sdx
```

The system will prepare the data disk and immediately reboot. The reboot will take 10 minutes or more depending on the speed of the new data disk; please be patient!

<div class='note'>

Using an USB attached SSD can draw quite some power. For instance on Raspberry Pi 3 the official Raspberry Pi power supply (PSU) only provides 2.5A which can be too tight. Use a more powerful power supply if you experience issues. Alternatively use a powered USB hub. Connect the Hub to one of the USB slots of your Raspberry Pi, and connect the SSD to the Hub. In this setup the power supply of the Hub will power the attached device(s).

> </div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
</div>

```

## Using external Data Disk

> Home Assistant Operating System supports storing most data on an external storage medium (e.g. USB attached SSD or HDD). This data disk contains not only user data but also most of the Home Assistant software as well (Core, Supervisor etc.). This means a fast data disk will make the system overall much faster.

Reviewer: We are already in a Home Assistant Operating System context so mentioning that here feels a bit redundant, but I can't think of another way to start this sentence.

Author: Repetition is not always bad. It is setting context, and emphasizes it's mainly the OS providing the feature (e.g. as opposed to backup, where Supervisor is the heavy lifting component).

![Graphics showing the architecture of the data disk feature](/images/haos/usb-data-disk.png)

> The data disk feature can be used at any time: The system will move existing data to the external data disk automatically. However, it is recommended to create and download a full <a href="#backups">Backup</a> before proceeding!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The system will move existing data to the external data disk automatically. However, it is recommended to create and download a full <a href="#backups">Backup</a> before proceeding!
```
This is not correct.

Author: What I'd like to say that it can be used even after initial installation etc. (data will be preserved). How about:

```suggestion
The data disk feature can be used on an existing installation without loosing data: The system will move existing data to the external data disk automatically. However, it is recommended to create and download a full <a href="#backups">Backup</a> before proceeding!
```

Reviewer: Better :+1:

<div class='note warning'>

  All data on the target disk will be overwritten!

</div>

<div class='note'>

  The storage capacity of the external data disk must be larger than the storage capacity of the existing (boot) disk.

</div>

<div class='note'>

>   If you have been using a data disk previously with Home Assistant Operating System, use your host computer to delete all partitions *before* using as data disk again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If you have been using a data disk previously with Home Assistant Operating System, you need to use your host computer to delete all partitions *before* using it as data disk again.
```

</div>

### Using UI to move the data partition

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

4. Select the data disk from the list of available devices.
5. Press "Move".

![Screenshot of the "Move datadisk" feature](/images/screenshots/move-datadisk.png)

### Using CLI to move the data partition

To see the current data disk use:

```sh
$ ha os info
...
data_disk: /dev/mmcblk1p4
...
```

To getting a list of supported detected devices which can be used by `datadisk`:

```sh
ha os datadisk list
```

To initiate the move to the new data disk use the `move` command:

```sh
ha os datadisk move /dev/sdx
```

The system will prepare the data disk and immediately reboot. The reboot will take 10 minutes or more depending on the speed of the new data disk; please be patient!

<div class='note'>

Using an USB attached SSD can draw quite some power. For instance on Raspberry Pi 3 the official Raspberry Pi power supply (PSU) only provides 2.5A which can be too tight. Use a more powerful power supply if you experience issues. Alternatively use a powered USB hub. Connect the Hub to one of the USB slots of your Raspberry Pi, and connect the SSD to the Hub. In this setup the power supply of the Hub will power the attached device(s).

> </dev>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
</div>
```

## Using external Data Disk

Home Assistant Operating System supports storing most data on an external storage medium (e.g. USB attached SSD or HDD). This data disk contains not only user data but also most of the Home Assistant software as well (Core, Supervisor etc.). This means a fast data disk will make the system overall much faster.

> ![Graphics showing the architecture of the data disk feature](/images/hassio/haos/usb-data-disk.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Graphics showing the architecture of the data disk feature](/images/haos/usb-data-disk.png)
```

The data disk feature can be used at any time: The system will move existing data to the external data disk automatically. However, it is recommended to create and download a full <a href="#backups">Backup</a> before proceeding!

<div class='note warning'>

  All data on the target disk will be overwritten!

</div>

<div class='note'>

  The storage capacity of the external data disk must be larger than the storage capacity of the existing (boot) disk.

</div>

<div class='note'>

  If you have been using a data disk previously with Home Assistant Operating System, use your host computer to delete all partitions *before* using as data disk again.

</div>

### Using UI to move the data partition

> With Supervisor 2021.10 and newer the data disk feature can be accessed on the frontend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This was added to supervisor 2021.09.4
However, since you don't have a choice in which supervisor version you are running there is no need to document that.

1. Connect the data disk to your system.
2. Go to {% my supervisor_system title="Supervisor > System" %} in the UI.
3. Press the three dots on the bottom right of the Host card and choose "Move datadisk"
4. Select the data disk from the list of available devices.
5. Press "Move".

> ![Screenshot of the "Move datadisk" feature](/images/hassio/screenshots/move-datadisk.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Screenshot of the "Move datadisk" feature](/images/screenshots/move-datadisk.png)
```

### Using CLI to move the data partition

To see the current data disk use:

```sh
$ ha os info
...
data_disk: /dev/mmcblk1p4
...
```

To getting a list of supported detected devices which can be used by `datadisk`:

```sh

> $ ha os datadisk list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ha os datadisk list
```
We only prefix commands with `$` when we need to show difference between the command and the output

```

To initiate the move to the new data disk use the `move` command:

```sh

> $ ha os datadisk move /dev/sdx

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ha os datadisk move /dev/sdx
```
